♪ Though the dust of you is gone ♪
♪ And the world of what is done ♪
♪ Fate reclaims the throne ♪
♪ Of revolution's bones ♪
♪ Come with me ♪
♪ Drink away on her beauty ♪
♪ We can fight them ♪
♪ I can say that
I can change the world ♪
♪ But if you let me ♪
♪ I can change our world for us ♪
♪ Come with me and... ♪
Spread out.
Search every building.
[Jacopo] Aah!
[grunting]
[grunts]
Always looking for trouble,
aren't you, boy?
[both grunting]
[gasping]
[grunting]
Aah.
You kill me now
and I'll become a martyr.
A martyr?
You'll be forgotten.
[screams]
[crows cawing]
Giuliano, it's time to get up.
Wide awake, Mother.
[girl giggling]
[knock on the door]
[door opens]
Ah, good. You're already dressed.
I'll get Lorenzo.
He's not in his room.
[footsteps receding]
You're a mule, Sandro.
And you are an ass.
Actually, you are an artist, Sandro,
and you, Poliziano,
you are a philosopher.
[Sandro]
Ah, which is another way of saying an ass.
I paint to honor God.
Yes, we all know how pious you are.
Oh, I suppose, you'd like me to paint
lots of Pagan gods and men's penises,
like all those Greeks you worship.
You have much to learn from the ancients.
We all do.
All right, all right, all right.
You're both right,
and you're both wrong.
You wish to depict the beauty of God
and you--you wish to recreate
the wisdom of the ancients.
-Precisely.
-Exactly.
Where's that wisdom come from
if not from the Lord?
[pours drink]
Don't you get sick of being right
all the time?
Now drink up...
before my mother comes knocking.
Not mother.
Me.
Please don't tell me
you've been up all night drinking.
You know, you become
more and more like mother, every day.
We have to be back in Florence by sundown.
You'd better pray
mother doesn't smell your breath.
[birds chirping]
[Lorenzo]
Let me help you with that, Father,
It's a wonder you can walk
given all the wine you've been drinking.
Forgive me. We stayed up rather later
than we should've.
Don't apologize.
I might have joined you
if I'd been 20 years young.
Enjoy the wine of youth, Lorenzo.
It's a cup from which you only drink once.
[horses neighing]
Late night for you too, Giuliano?
One's mouth can be used for things
other than talking, big brother.
Aah.
[horse trotting]
[Giuliano] Fine day, isn't it, brother?
[Lorenzo] Glorious.
I am gonna miss this place.
It always reminds me of grandfather.
Ahhh.
[Lorenzo] Father.
Go back. Go back.
-[horses whinnying]
-Turn around.
[guard] Go. Go. Go.
[Giuliano] The carriage, let's go.
[Lorenzo] Father.
[groans]
[grunts]
Father.
[screaming]
[grunting]
[arrow firing]
[screams]
Take cover.
[sword unsheathing]
[grunting]
[thud]
Just in time, I see.
Giuliano, tell them how I struck that man
with my stick.
Father, you looked like a Greek God
from one of Poliziano's stories.
There you see.
A gout ridden Greek God.
I am perfectly all right.
He's not all right.
Somebody needs to fetch his surgeon.
Let's get you to bed.
[man] Let me help.
[man] You don't look dead to me.
Hungover, more like it.
If they kill Lorenzo,
we'd have to tell our own dirty jokes.
And pay for your own wine.
They said you killed a man.
And he was stupidly brave doing it, too.
He ran straight through a hail of arrows.
Have the Priori been informed?
Jacopo Pazzi called
an emergency meeting at his palazzo.
Why his palazzo?
To seize power behind closed doors.
We should go.
[Jacopo] This was an act of terror.
Pure and simple.
An attack on one of us
is an attack on us all.
We must act and we must act now.
Act against whom, Messer Pazzi?
No one has taken responsibility
for this cowardly attack.
[Lorenzo] And no-one will.
[crowd] Lorenzo.
Lorenzo, we are relieved beyond measure
to see you alive.
Thank you, Messer Soderini.
Your father will make a full recovery,
I trust?
I pray that he will, Bastiano.
I pray that he will.
What of the men who attacked you,
have they named their paymaster?
They claim not to know his name.
[man] Then this without doubt
is a foreign agent.
A Venetian,
opposed to our alliance with Milan.
My thoughts precisely.
May I address the restricted council?
I am sorry, Master Lorenzo,
but only members of this body
are afforded that privilege.
I think we can make an exception,
Gonfaloniere.
Let our young hero speak.
Florence...
has prospered these many years
under the leadership of my family.
And so many of the dreams that my father
and his father's father
had for this republic have come true.
Forgive me, Lorenzo, but one man's dream
is another's nightmare.
My nephew and I have never understood
your family's insistence
on throwing money at the poor.
We offer simple Christian charity
so that those not born
into wealth and privilege
might have a chance to prosper.
Lorenzo, you waste funds
we can ill afford,
putting the future
of this republic at risk.
What did you wish to say, Lorenzo?
That we need not look abroad to find men
who hate the Florence
that we've brought about.
I hope you are not suggesting anyone here,
young man.
There, there...
we must forgive young Master Lorenzo.
His wisdom is parroted from books,
not won through the trials of life.
Everyone on the restricted council
is loyal to your family, Lorenzo.
Indeed.
The Medici take great pains to ensure it.
I mean no offence, gentlemen,
but I feel certain
that war is the last thing
that my father would wish.
I beg for time.
Time to name the real criminal
and keep one crime
from being compounded by another.
[dogs barking]
Bianca, stay with your father.
Yes.
[Lucrezia] Lorenzo. Giuliano.
What's happened?
Priori have given us time
to determine who is behind the attack.
You'll do no such thing.
Jacopo Pazzi believes that
Venice was responsible.
He'll vote for war
unless we can prove otherwise.
A war that would bleed this republic dry.
Listen to me, you are safe now,
but whoever tried to kill you today
could do so again.
Which is why we need to determine
who was behind the attack.
Don't worry, Mother. We'll be careful.
Come on.
[footsteps receding]
Lorenzo.
How are you?
I'm fine.
No, you are not.
I can see it.
I killed a man today.
I watched the life
drain from his eyes.
It was self-defense.
As soon as he killed the guards,
you had no choice.
I know, I know.
And yet I took a life.
Everything that that man was,
everything that...
everything that he'll ever be
is gone from this world...
forever.
It weighs on you, as it should,
but you made the right choice, son.
And in the eyes of man and God,
you must make peace with it.
[footsteps receding]
[sighs]
[owl hooting]
[dogs barking]
[Contessina] Lorenzo.
[young Lorenzo] What is it, grand-mama?
Come.
I will show you.
These are beautiful.
Each panel shows a medjay
heading to Bethlehem
to witness the nativity.
Do you recognize them?
It's papa, and there's grandfather.
[Contessina]
Riding your great-grandfather's mule.
But they weren't in Bethlehem.
What does it mean?
[Contessina] It means our family
is here to serve God, as the medjay did.
And now look who's leading us all.
Is that me?
One day you will lead us...
as you father led this family
and his father before him.
Does it scare you?
A little.
Let the fear drive you
to work hard and prepare...
so that when the time comes,
you'll be ready.
[door opens]
[church bell tolling]
[laughing]
[indistinct chatter]
You got my letter?
I wasn't sure you'd still come.
I couldn't stay away.
[indistinct crowd chatter]
Was your uncle behind the attack?
Does your brother suspect him?
Of course.
I can't-- I can't be sure, but...
No, I don't think so.
Then who?
I have no mind for politics, Bianca,
you know that.
But Sandro and Giuliano
are looking into it.
Once they clear your uncle,
we declare our love.
-We couldn't possibly do that.
-Why not?
My uncle would never consent,
I doubt your father would either.
He agreed to our marriage once before.
When we were children.
Your father and brothers
nearly lost their lives yesterday, Bianca.
We must be careful...
lest we lose ours.
[Francesco] Uncle.
Uncle.
Gianni...
good to see you.
And you, Master Francesco.
Brother.
What a wonderful surprise!
We weren't expecting you home
until next month.
You should have written.
Our affairs in Rome are back in order.
Although I am sorry to report
the Holy Father is ill.
I will not shed a tear when he passes.
The Pope was no friend to us.
I heard there was an assassination attempt
on the Medici yesterday.
Were you involved?
You have been away
too long and forgotten, nephew.
I ask the questions here, not you.
Come.
Let's get a drink.
At the Dove.
The Dove is closed.
-[Francesco] Since when?
-This morning.
They said the Medici revoked their credit.
Well, there's more than one
tavern in Florence.
[Jacopo] You will drink later.
A change to Rome
may bring change to Florence
and with Piero recalling loans,
there may be better ways
of destroying the Medici
than with a blade.
[footsteps approaching]
Lorenzo...
and your beautiful mother.
[Lucrezia] General Sforza.
Ma donna.
Surely you've not forgotten
your kind invitation.
No. No.
Certainly not.
We'll ready your rooms at once.
That is by that young artist, Botticelli,
isn't it?
Magnificent.
Where's your father, boy?
[footsteps approaching]
I am right here.
You should rest, Father.
I am rested.
Come, Galeazzo.
[pigeons cooing]
Perhaps your son is right, Messer Medici.
You should rest.
[breathing heavily]
Seeing you here puts my mind at rest.
We hear a Venetian
ordered the assassination attempt
in an effort to disrupt our alliance.
We'll get to the bottom of it soon enough.
In the meantime,
you and I have business to discuss.
Do we?
You don't think
I asked you all this way to socialize?
You refer to my father's debt.
Your noble father died three years ago.
Now you are the duke, the debt is yours.
I am afraid it must remain unpaid.
But its obligation is due,
past due, in fact.
I don't have it.
All our funds were invested
in weaponary and soldiers.
[Piero] Soldiers?
Milan is surrounded by enemies.
Surely you understand that security
must come before all else.
I see I have put you
in a difficult situation.
Never mind.
It's not your concern.
But it is.
The Medici are allies to Milan.
And if your family is weakened,
we are weakened, too.
Confide in a friend, Messer.
The bank has been overextended for months.
I began by recalling smaller debts
to buy time but they are not enough.
If your debt is unrepaid
then our assets will be seized
and our power gone.
Is it as bad as that?
I cannot repay my debt with money,
Messer Medici.
But perhaps I can repay it another way.
What other way?
Your position is threatened
but with my army, you could restore it.
Crush your enemies
and we call my father's debt settled.
After your men have done raping,
looting and pillaging this city?
I know you wouldn't have
wished for the occupation of Florence
but surely needs must.
To preserve the power of your family.
My men are within riding distance.
Just say the word,
and the Medici are saved.
We need to talk.
[Lorenzo] Well...
We went to an inn
where the assassins were staying,
and found this hidden in their bags.
[Lorenzo] The Pazzi seal.
Which proves Jacopo Pazzi hired them.
You don't know that.
Not for certain.
Why else would it be there?
You must take this evidence
to the Priori right away.
No.
No, we'll take it to Jacopo Pazzi.
Whatever for?
Well, if he's innocent
then giving him the chance to prove it
binds him to our cause.
If not then we go the Priori
having already assumed
that we're fair-minded.
We care about justice for father
not old-man Pazzi.
If we want justice,
then we will treat others justly.
Wait here.
Well, well.
That's twice in as many days the Medici
boys grace us with their presence.
[Jacopo laughs]
You remember Guglielmo's brother,
don't you?
Francesco.
The last time we saw each other
we had words over a lady.
Let's let bygones be bygones, shall we?
Let's not.
Pazzi.
[Jacopo laughs] Now, now, boys.
How can we help you?
Sandro Botticelli and I... found this.
In the assassin's chambers.
How did that get there?
Hmm.
We're hoping
you could help us out with that.
You can't think
I had anything to do with it?
Well, the medallion
bears your seal, does it not?
Can you explain that?
Giuliano must have planted it,
in an effort to distract
from his ridiculous father.
[sword unsheathing]
Messer Pazzi, I...
Guards!
Stop, please! Put down your weapons.
We come here in peace.
And your brother leaves in chains.
Arrest him.
It was an accident, it was an accident.
It's all right, brother.
I don't mind spending the night in jail.
Not if it means the Priori get to see
what Pazzi justice is really like.
-You'll hang for attempted murder.
-It won't be me who hangs for that.
[Sandro] Well, well.
We are the wounded party,
now Jacopo gets to play victim,
I'm telling you...
Giuliano's temper.
[man] Medici.
Piero de' Medici's boy.
Yes.
Thank God that arrow
didn't hit your father in the heart.
-Thank you, friend.
-Oh, I am no friend.
If it had hit your father's heart,
it would have bounced off stone.
Hey.
He gives a working man a loan
and two years to pay it off,
and then demands it all in a week.
I graft and graft...
one flick of his quill, I lose my business
and my family are living on the street.
I think there must be some mistake.
There are plenty of mistakes.
I know a dozen merchants
chucked out of their homes,
thanks to your father.
Let's go. We need to go.
Your grandfather
would never have done this.
He fired those arrows.
They came from the heavens.
Will I live?
Hmm.
Your humors are out of balance.
But the pus...
indicates your body
is ridding itself of toxins.
I recommend you should drink
plenty of wine.
A most welcome prescription.
[door opens]
Well, I am not dead.
From the looks on your faces,
one would think
you have come to my funeral.
Our son has just seen the Pazzi.
We found evidence
that Jacopo hired the assassins.
But there was an altercation and...
Giuliano is being held
until the Priori convenes.
See that he's being given
clean water and good food.
We don't want him poisoned
like his grandfather.
What else are you not telling me?
It's what you haven't told us.
Lorenzo was accosted
in the street by merchants.
They say you have recalled
dozens of loans.
I was hoping to spare you both.
The bank is overextended.
But surely the Pope's tides...
I have already borrowed
against the Pope's tides
and still we come up short.
But to take from those
who can least afford it--
Lorenzo.
As your grandfather said,
"Sometimes, it is necessary to do some bad
in order to do good."
Their labor built this republic, Father.
They turn against us
and we have got nothing.
It's all right.
I have come to an agreement with the duke.
Sforza will repay his father's loan?
Yes.
Then I am greatly relieved.
As am I.
[bell tolling]
[Bianca] Well?
My brother provoked yours.
He didn't mean to hurt my uncle.
This is the last thing we needed.
I think that I can prove that my uncle
didn't try to have your father killed.
It would almost certainly
lessen the tensions
between our families.
Can you?
I might.
You're brilliant.
[thunder rumbling]
Ground gold.
My physician says it extends life.
[indistinct conversation]
...your young artist, Botticelli.
I would like him to come
paint for me in Milan.
Well, you may ask him, General,
but I very much doubt he will accept.
Why not? I'd pay him well.
Sandro was an orphan.
We recognized his talent
and we raised him alongside our own sons.
They're like brothers.
You Medici have
strange ways of treating artists
and repaying a favor.
What favor?
Your husband told you
of our arrangement, did he not?
My husband merely told me
you were repaying a debt due.
With something more precious
than money.
I thought you weren't coming.
Is your husband here?
Out on business.
Sorry about yesterday.
Well, I have heard some
shoddy excuses
for standing up a lover but...
saving your father's life...
You have to do better than "sorry".
How is he?
He is in pain.
He's shaken.
-But alive.
-Hmm.
Were you hurt?
No.
[thunder rumbling]
Not even a...
slight ache... here.
No.
Not even here?
What about here?
No.
What is that brilliant
mind of yours thinking?
About...
About whether it is necessary sometimes
to do bad in order to do good.
What do you mean by that?
My father has struck a deal
with the Duke of Milan.
And I fear that times are more dire
than he said.
So ask him.
I can't.
Why?
He sees me as a boy.
He's trying to shield me from the truth.
But you are not a boy, Lorenzo.
Ah.
You're a man.
An asset to your father,
if only he could see it.
So how do I help him?
You'll find a way.
-Will I?
-Mm-hmm.
[church bell tolling]
Where are you going?
Ah, we have to present our case
against Jacopo Pazzi to the Priori.
Wish me luck.
[footsteps receding]
The Medicis' have accused me
of hiring assassins
and paying them with this
gold medallion.
But I can prove that this coin
did not belong to any assassin.
Tell me, Messer Fanti,
do you recognize this?
Yes, Signore.
I told your nephew
it has my initials on it.
A.F.
Arturo Fanti.
There must be
a thousand A.F's. in Tuscany.
This one is bent.
Put it on a flat surface, it will wobble.
[crowd murmuring]
You must have been very pleased
to receive it but you sold it.
Because it's bent?
Because it's gold.
And the Medici recalled my loan last week.
Did you?
So the Medici case is,
I or one of my nephews,
paid a hired assassin
with a second-hand medal
we bought in the market,
rather than use any
of the untraceable gold in our bank.
Only the Pazzi hate my father enough
to try to kill him.
It is natural for a son
to be blind to the faults of his father,
and for that reason
if Giuliano de' Medici apologizes,
I am willing to forgive and forget
his slander
and physical assault.
[crowd murmurs]
Signor. [coughs]
On behalf of the Medici,
I apologize to the noble Pazzi family
for my brother's... temperate reaction
to the murderous attack on our father.
We accept now that we were mistaken.
I was hoping
your brother might speak for himself.
Just say sorry.
You don't have to mean it.
Never mind.
I will take his silence as an apology.
I'd still like to know how that medallion
got into the assassin's room.
Where are you going?
I need some air.
[Sorderini] Lorenzo.
Everyone, go home.
I'll meet you there.
Messer Soderini.
Tell him what you saw, son.
[Bastiano] It's the Pazzi.
They've been spreading word
the Medici are insolvent.
-[crowd screaming]
-[man] Give us our money.
Come back tomorrow.
You'll all be paid tomorrow.
[Bastiano] With one hand,
they force a run on your bank
and with the other,
they offer to assume the merchant's
distressed credit at a discounted rate.
The Pazzi Bank will pay five lira
to the florin.
It's not what the Medici Bank
promised you, of course.
But it is cash in your hand,
and more than you'll see from the Medici
who are insolvent.
[Bastiano] They've acquired accounts
from dozens of merchants
at a discounted rate,
enriching their bank
while crippling yours.
If this continues,
you'll be bankrupt within days.
[indistinct chatter]
[whistling]
Medici.
You didn't find Fanti's medal
in that assassin's room.
And if you did,
it was you who put it there.
I don't know how he did it,
but it was your uncle who hired him.
[Giuliano grunts]
This just proves my point.
Kill me now...
then you'll be the first man
the Priori come looking for.
[grunting]
The streets are teaming with mobs
calling for Medici blood.
Good luck inventing evidence to prove
I had anything to do with this.
[grunting]
[door opens]
Giuliano.
Fetch some towels and water.
[grunts]
Who did this to you?
Pazzi.
Francesco Pazzi.
He will pay for this.
Lorenzo, summon the Priori.
We must demand justice.
[stick clanging]
There will be no need for that,
will there, Father?
Lorenzo, what do you mean?
I mean, the duke is no longer
repaying the loan with money.
The duke's men are outside the city walls.
They will march on Florence at midnight.
Those men will sack this city, Father.
And you agreed to it.
I know what they will do.
-Father.
-No, you must not do this.
What choice is there?
Would you see us ruined
and the Pazzi undo all the good
we've done for the people of Florence.
Piero.
I have loved and supported you
my entire life,
but this...
this you must not do.
There is no choice.
Oh, husband,
there is always a choice.
Only if you are prepared to lose.
My father and his father before him
never were
and neither am I.
[horses whinnying]
Now we ride!
[shouting]
[Contessina] One day you will lead us...
Does it scare you?
[Young Lorenzo] A little.
[Contessina] Let the fear drive you
to work hard and prepare.
So that when the time comes,
you'll be ready.
Lorenzo.
Are you all right?
Send messengers to summon
the members of the Priori.
Here?
Yes.
[bell tolling]
Lorenzo.
What's the meaning of this?
Yes, young Medici.
What's your business
with the Priori this time?
Not more baseless charges, I hope.
I have called you here to save Florence.
We didn't know it needed saving.
You are aware
that my father has called in debts
to cover a loan that he made
to the duke of Milan's father.
And that ordinary citizens are suffering
and that they're rightly angry.
Now the duke intends to repay his debt
by unleashing an army
on our people.
This is deeply troubling, Lorenzo.
Why are you telling us this?
Because my father...
He's a good... And he is an honorable man.
But he is no longer the head of this bank.
But that's ridiculous. Who removed him?
I am going to.
Right now,
provided the restricted council
agree to give me his seat in the Signoria.
Or the duke's men
will overrun our city, is that right?
I will cancel the loan recalls
that my father has issued
and I will send the duke back to Milan.
You stab your own father in the back.
Why should we trust you?
You trust me...
because your nephew attacked my brother
in the street today.
Oh, no. That sounds familiar.
[Lorenzo] You trust me...
because I forgive him.
Because maybe my brother
unjustly accused your family of being
behind the plot to kill my father.
And perhaps,
Francesco felt that he had to retaliate.
Well, I forgive him.
Because this settling of old scores
has never settled anything.
We have to put our feuds
behind us, gentlemen.
To do good,
we have to be good.
For the future of Florence.
For the future of us all.
A vote.
[Sforza] Open these gates.
Open them or my men
will smash through them
and carry your heads on pikes.
All in favor?
[man] Aah.
[men shouting]
Lorenzo, debts don't just go away.
They have to be accounted for.
I understand.
I have an offer.
An alliance,
between your family's bank and mine.
Forged in marriage.
Your sister Bianca and my son Bastiano.
He's always had a great affection for her.
Have you?
You have a deal.
[guard] Forward!
Up!
Stop your men, Duke.
Out of our way, Lorenzo.
We have an understanding with your father.
I am now the head of the bank,
and your presence here is illegal.
You brand me a criminal
and then expect me to retreat.
Well if you do, I will write a letter,
saying that I implored you
to protect this city,
and that you stayed your hand
at my request.
You will be seen as a hero...
not as a criminal.
And my father's debt?
It remains unpaid,
while your control of the city crumbles.
I will find another way to save this bank
and this city.
[horses neighing]
A shame.
I was greatly looking forward to this.
But it's your grave, Medici.
Good luck.
[man shouting]
[Sandro] You did it.
You saved Florence.
Without so much as raising your sword.
I destroyed my father
and compelled the Priori to act from fear.
Our enemies will come at us
from all sides now.
[Paolo Buonvino & Skin's
"Renaissance" playing]
♪ I am here for all to see ♪
♪ In my bones there's dignity ♪
♪ I will fight them ♪
♪ I can say that I can change the world ♪
♪ But if you let me ♪
♪ I can change our world for us ♪
♪ Come with me and ♪
♪ Make this vision all brand new ♪
♪ We can fight them ♪
♪ I can say that I can win it all ♪
♪ Come with me and ♪
♪ I will make my worst untold ♪
♪ Let me do this ♪
♪ I am here ♪
♪ To rejoice ♪
♪ To revenge ♪
♪ To resolve ♪
♪ To be longed for ♪
♪ I am here ♪
♪ To rejoice ♪
♪ To revenge ♪
♪ To resolve ♪
♪ To be longed for ♪
♪ I am here ♪
♪ Sometimes I justify the words I spill ♪
♪ Like secret angels they test your will ♪
♪ Outside my troubles are over ♪